Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Jason Laude.
The venue is the Swicker office.
The date today is Friday the 21st of November 2014.
Jason, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full for the record?
My name in full Jason Windsor Laude.
J-A-S-O-N-W-I-N-S-D-O-R-L-A-W-D-A-Y.
Thank you very much for that.
Jason, how did you first get involved in Cardiff Mars Carnival?
Well I was used to live in Cardiff.
I was working as a graphic designer in those days
and a friend of mine Babs was involved in the Carnival of 1991.
Encouraged me to come along.
So I sort of came along, had a look around
and started helping out with making the costumes.
But I was also a musician as well and I got
sort of roped into one of the bands in the Carnival with Peter Stacey.
The band he formed then went on to continue after the Carnival.
It was called Peep a Drum, Pipe and Drums.
And there was me and Steve Singh, Kalp and George Whitfield.
We played in rag costumes in the Carnival but on the actual day.
So we were practicing that during the day times.
And also I was helping Amaru Chittawa to do his section of the Carnival.
So I sort of got involved.
I remember the first sort of day I met up with Amaru.
And it was like on a Friday and he was showing me to do some stuff
and he was going to go back to London for the weekend
and he left me to get on with some stuff over the weekend.
I just got right into it.
I was there whole of Saturday, whole of Sunday.
When he came back on Monday morning I'd done it all and he was quite amazed.
And from that point on we got on really well.
And so subsequent years I tended to work more with him
on his section of the Carnival because we sort of got on really well.
And yeah, he was quite an inspiring person to work with
and interesting designs and everything.
Yeah, so the first time we went down to Bute Town,
marching down the streets I remember all the samba bands and the steel pan.
Were you playing flute?
I was playing flute, yeah.
I was playing flute then but Peter Stacey was playing bagpipes at the time.
I'd never really sat down with anybody playing bagpipes.
We were playing traditional Welsh tunes but it brought it into a different sort of life,
playing on the pipes and things and the way we were doing it.
So that sort of inspired me to get some pipes and I've been playing pipes ever since now.
These are Welsh bagpipes?
Yeah, Welsh and all sorts.
Oh yeah, reeds of any sort.
Yeah, yeah.
Three shape and size.
And I'm playing semi-professionally now,
playing pipes and flute in various bands and I've been abroad playing and things.
That little seed that was planted those years ago has grown into a big part of my life now.
It's interesting that you mentioned Piba Drum because of course
the interculturalism which is in Swicker's name was there from the onset, wasn't it?
Absolutely.
Steve Singh was playing the massive Punjabi traditional drum, the dohlak.
Yes, very much so.
Did he have it taped on, there was a point at which he evolved his own approach to it,
which was rather than playing it two-handed, he sort of taped on withies to one hand and he looked
like sort of a single-handed Freddy Krueger or something, didn't he?
Yeah, he was doing some quite fancy stuff there.
It was great, the combination of that rhythm with the pipes as well.
I think it worked really well.
I can hear it in my head even now.
Yeah, and they were just, we did a mixture of Punjabi tunes but also primarily Welsh
tunes as well and it really sounded great because I was used to, my father was in
folk musician as well and folk performer and I'd grown up with the Welsh tradition and found it
a little bit cheesy and tired and that new fresh approach with a bit of other influences coming in
sort of brought it into real life, it was great. Yeah, and I kept in touch with Peter and we
see each other every now and then. We played some music together as well since then.
That's extraordinary, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah, it is.
Oh, nice years.
Yeah.
So that was the second ever Cardiff Mars Carnival.
The second ever, I remember going down to Bute Town and yeah, the big march down to Bute Town
and then into the Bute Town Carnival and then I remember I'd been going to the Bute Town Carnival
for quite a few years so they all get a bit blended into one so I can't remember who was
playing there. I remember seeing Aswan there and musical youth and people like this and
at that time down the docks was a bit of a different place to what it is now.
Cardiff Bay Development Corporation, I've seen to that, haven't I?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yes.
I remember the Bute Town riots and everything.
You know, great community down there and great fun on the day and, you know,
good support from everybody along the route and everything.
Yes, very warmly received. And we had good weather, I think.
Yeah, really sunny, great, great, great time, you know.
I think your costumes, which were sort of, as you say, based on rags, were
a carnival interpretation of a sort of raggedy Welsh tradition from Pembrokeshire.
Yeah, there's rag costumes right through the British Isles, really, and certainly it's in
in the Welsh tradition, part of the Morris tradition and stuff like that, you know, so it's
coming from there, you know. Yeah, it was great. That was the first year then and the end of that
year I actually moved away from Cardiff up to the countryside, up into the mountains and I'd had
enough of the city, you know, and I had enough of working in an office and things and I went up
and started working, doing conservation work and got a job with the National Trust and,
you know, my lifestyle changed quite a bit, but I still made the point of coming back to Cardiff
and getting involved in the carnival because, you know, I really wouldn't miss it for the world,
you know, so I'd take time out and come down for a good couple of weeks during the carnival and
for the subsequent years right up to 95 and getting more and more involved into it.
Working more closely with Amaru and even also Amaru would come down and visit me and we'd work on
costume designs and stuff, you know, six months beforehand and so we'd get stuff together and
we were working quite closely those years, you know. I think he was very impressed from the onset by
your making skills and you must have built up quite a skill set, I mean, from that. Yeah, I did,
you know, it was, I'd never used withies before, you know. And you know why they're called withies?
No, actually. Because withies we're going to make something. All right, okay. Sorry, I thought I'd
just get the company joke on record there. Okay, okay. Thank you for laughing. That's a good one.
Thank you for laughing with me. Yeah, that's my kind of you. Well, that's the two main things,
is withies and gaffer tape. Yes. A few pictures. The DNA of carnival life. Yeah, I think just about
most of the pictures that are of me, you can see some gaffer tape about me somewhere for emergency
use, you know, because with each of the carnivals I'd never actually worked on my own costume and I
just got into whatever was spare at the end, you know, on the day of the carnival. It shows
the generosity of spirit, you know, facilitating other people rather than, it wasn't all me, me, me.
No, no, it's never about that. I just love being involved in it and all the different characters
you'd meet and the things that you make, you know. Yes. I mean, there's a massive social side to it,
isn't it? I mean, it's like a mini village of creativity, I would say. Yeah, absolutely. It's
really interesting. And you meet people from all walks of life as well, you know. Absolutely, yeah.
You know, which is fantastic. Yeah, you know, walks of life from Cardiff and beyond, you know,
there's people from all over Brazil and, you know, the Caribbean and everything. Yes, quite internationalist
intercultural. You know, great fun. So after the first one in 1991, what was your next carnival
step? Yeah, I came back for the next one. I kept in touch a bit with Amaru and I said that I'd
definitely be there. So I came along and it was the following year then we were in, just looking at
the list now, Ninian Park Primary School. It was a bigger school again and the carnival seemed a bit
bigger again. There's more people involved and there was Sam Alexander, José Angela, the Brazilian
contingent come along and they were doing a bit of capoeira and Brazilian dancing and... Maracatu.
Maracatu, you know, the, yeah, Adrian and everybody bringing in maracatu drumming.
Great fun. And there was also Mrs. Douglas with her cooking was there as well. Yes, it was. I think
the problem about the Mascam was location wise, it wasn't close to any local shops. So whilst
people could prepare and bring food, what we decided that year was to involve Ina Douglas,
who lived in Riverside and actually had a sort of, I think it was called a pop-up cafe now.
Yeah. But do you remember the dumplings? I was just going to say there's dumplings the size of that
and you just go back into the room and you'd be holding a stuff and you just go Mrs. Douglas,
Mrs. Douglas, Mr. Douglas, yeah. Yes. You know, the dumplings. This is Douglas and the dumplings.
The dumplings, yeah. Oh yeah, fantastic, great, great food, really nice, proper Caribbean food,
probably the first time I'd ever eaten Caribbean food and, you know. You're probably still
digesting it now. Don't get enough of it, that's for sure. Not in Fandai though. No, no.
Yeah, so that year, yeah, there was more of a Brazilian element that year and I was, yeah,
crashing out down at Adrian's place. Did you get a bed or were you having to sleep on the floor?
I was on the sofa. On the sofa, you were on it. Yeah. Right. Yeah, so that was when I got to know
Adrian pretty well but then, you know, we were sort of more involved in the actual making
side of things and I remember making a lot of pom-poms that year as well, helping with the
pom-poms. A lot of people, if anybody was spared, they would just make a pom-pom. Yeah, pom-pom
factory. Yeah. I forget which of the indigenous people who were doing the trade were pom-pom
based. I don't know. I do remember a lot of pom-poms that keep going on, quite frankly.
And I sort of, you know, yeah, I'd never known how to make them but now I do.
Do you still wake up screaming? Mountains of pom-poms, yeah.
Yeah, so that was that year and then following that we went into Coté's Community Centre,
wasn't it? Yes. And yeah, then it was just getting more intense every year so I spent
more time with Mara working beforehand on costume designs and then when it came to the actual
camp, I'd be staying quite late because what tended to happen was that a lot of people would
come in the day and you'd be just helping, you'd be going around in circles just helping people
make stuff. You wouldn't be working on anything specific yourself, you know, you'd be helping
other people all day so the only time you get to work on something more complex or something that,
you know, you needed to work on yourself would be in the evening, later on in the evening. So I tend
to work late, stay late and actually sleep in the centre. Right. You know, take the sleeping bag and
just crash out on, there was loads of pads of foam and you could make some comfy beds there.
You sort of nested, would you? Yeah, yeah, you know, I'd go back to, you know, to whoever's
place I was crashing out at the time and every now and then but most of the time it'd be in.
That's real dedication, it's fabulous. Yeah, but it was also a magical time, you know, you can imagine
late at night when it might be only one or two of you in there and you might be trying to get to
sleep and it's all, it's been frenetic through the day and then you're just sort of lying there and
you're suddenly aware of all these mad costumes all around you and this strange place. In the half
night. Yeah, in the half light. Absolutely. Still, strange creakings and rustlings where things are
settling and with ease of bending and, you know, that was quite magical as well on its own and then,
you know, come the morning you'd have a little bit of time to get some things together and then
the next rush would start. Yes, yes. And people would come to you with their own ideas of what
they wanted to do but not really the technical ability to think it through so you sort of get
them together and get them to make stuff but I would make up, you know, one-off things for
people as well, you know, certain, I remember doing like a crow head with somebody with a snapping jaw
on it which was quite sort of complex so I did that for them myself, you know. Yeah, yeah. And
there was, you know, there were other sort of daily things going on, there was kids coming in
that wanted to just mess around and other faces painted and stuff and you, you know, not necessarily
part of the carnival that day but you sort of help out and entertain them and yeah. It was,
no, it was very much a libertarian sort of drop-in approach. Yeah. You know, I've had other interviews
saying, the view-ees who've gone on to build up a massive skill set and the rest of them saying,
you know, Kate's my first joint, the first thing I liked was the fact that, you know, after school
the mums would turn up with a four-pack of Stella and we'd be smoking our fags whilst working the
glue guns. Yeah, yeah. Obviously health and safety and things have changed since then. Yeah. It had
a very, it was coming from a different place in a way. Yeah, absolutely. And you had these different
sections in the room as well and very different approaches to stuff, you know. Was there a degree
of internal competition between you? Yeah, there was always an element of that although, you know,
I always found that, you know, I get on with anybody anyway, you know, there's probably more
competition with perhaps the, you know, the bigger personalities in the thing, you know. I just kept
my head down and got on with the work but it was always good fun to see what other people were
coming up with and their own sort of vision of, you know, whether it's going to be more sort of
futuristic or, you know, or more traditional carnival style or something else altogether.
Certainly in 94, I remember we, because the route and the way in which the finale
has been staged has changed over the 25 years of the Cardiff Carnival and of course back then
we finished the parade and put on a performance which varied in terms of its formality or
informality on the steps of the National Museum of Wales. Absolutely. With pyrotechnics as well.
Yeah, fake blood. Fake blood, oh gosh. Shall we tell the question, do you want to tell a fake blood story or shall I?
You may know it better than me but it was angels and devils, wasn't it? Yes, yes it was and I sort
of remember the dance, you know, because there was dance routines worked out as part of the
whole thing and yeah they were dying on the steps there and using fake blood and...
Because we've done a test thing we did because the last thing you want to do, I used to sign
an indemnity with the National Museum of Wales that we wouldn't do anything to the fabric of
the building which you know is a national treasure by definition. Unfortunately in that year
somebody over enthusiastically and deliberately decided to on the day not go with a mix that
would agree that we knew we could wash out and wouldn't stain and come the day the the blood that
was in the pump action water pistols that shotguns, the pump action water shotguns that the devils had
to drench the white angels was mixed to a double or triple at the strength that we'd agreed upon
and to my horror the next day when I went back I discovered we had died the steps of the National
Museum of Wales. I of course was summoned to the director's office and the indemnity was
waved in my face. Fortunately it was a gentleman in that who understood how carnival aspires to
many things and occasionally rules are broken accidentally or even deliberately and gave me
six months leeway to see whether or not Welsh weather would actually take the stain out and I
remember going back on a regular basis and about three months in discovering that the red had turned
to a light purple and at the end of six months it had actually gone and I was so relieved because
the idea that we could that a small publicly funded arts organisation could somehow make
good the damage to the steps of the National Museum of Wales was impossible. I mean you know
we would have had to close as it were so it was a good day when I marched up there and discovered
that the stains had finally gone thank God. Well you can praise the Welsh weather for that that's
for sure. No absolutely I mean I won't even talk about acid rain.
Yeah so you know and the carnival route would change a bit every year as well even going
through town and you know and ending up at the castle and everything. So whilst you started it
as a musician in the first one. That musician well like my friend got me involved just to come and
help out making stuff and then I found that the band was happening as well and they said oh you
know if you're a musician do you want to help you join in with us and so I did you know so
yeah it was a mixture of making. But then I suppose you very much became a maker.
Occasionally I'd go to see him and then he'd come down to see me and you know we'd go walking in
the mountains you know and his kids would come up as well I took them caving and things you know.
Wow. So yeah we had you know a good relationship worked on some great designs and things
and you know the sort of the last year I worked there there was a bit of a falling out there
with Amaru and he sort of pulled out at the last minute and then it was on the day of the launch
of the carnival. All sort of down to me then you know and well you know not me but you know
we all had to pull together to keep to pull it off. Yes of course. I'm sure you had to
your game personally. Yeah absolutely. But you know we were all we'd all been working together
for years you know anyway and it you know we came together as a team anyway and you know I had all
the designs and things and Amaru was still supportive in the sort of background you know
in his encouragement you know he wanted it to go ahead. Yes. You know he was sorry he wasn't there
he did turn up on the day. Yes. You know and I saw him there and he was you know really happy
with the costumes and loved to see it. It was a shame he wasn't there and it was but it was very
intense again. Yes. Pulling all that together you know. Now that did include a rather spectacular
elephant. Oh yeah it was a big elephant two-man elephant that was one thing I'd be sort of working
on late at night to try and get that together and I thought you know I didn't think it was going to
take as long as it did but it came off okay it was like a sort of bamboo and witty frame
with a sort of life-size elephant with two-man elephant
a lovely painted head and you know little eye slits and things.
Come the evening of the carnival there was two guys came in they looked fairly sort of beefy and
said right do you want to be in this elephant then oh yeah fine they got in there and they went off
but they had shorts on and they were just their little legs sticking up and the trainers you know
we didn't sort of do elephant legs as well but you know with all the other people around you
just see the top of the elephant floating through so it was fine but we've just looked at a picture
where in fact you can see that yeah you can see beautiful beautiful very realistic wrinkly skinned
twinkling eye yeah you know but trunks and beautifully-eared elephant and they're sticking
out at the bottom and these two two sets of little human legs with the with trainers on which are
sweet in a way i have to say the ears were flappable and oh god they were kinetic yeah so it was um the
frame was lowered down so they could hold it in their arms but we also had straps as well so their
arms were a bit free and part of the deal was that they had enough beer to keep them going so we
strapped beer inside the elephant there so excellent outside of the public they could actually
they did complain a bit of every eventuality yeah because that you know i thought well they're
going to be stuck inside that and they were going to miss a lot of things because they couldn't
really see what was going on they needed hydrating obviously yeah and the artist jack
and jack armstrong yes jack sullivan sullivan yeah gone i'm thinking of them um jack sullivan
yeah yeah he um sort of took charge of leading them around yes you know and he was uh he loved
the elephant and he led them around the whole parade it's worth mentioning that jack sullivan
the local artist and painter actually produced a number of artworks um that you know of swicker
the carnival camp the parades and the rest of it sadly he's no longer with us but uh
i hope in the future those those pictures are picked up and yeah you know i've got one myself
you know and i'm sure there's more around and the sketches you know he was lightning sketches
oh gosh he was there i always seen with in my mind side with a pad in his hand yeah yeah have
you still have you got access to them are they around i have made a mental note that i'm going
to try and do this for the exhibition of the carnival story because again that's that's
i think it would be worth doing yeah yeah absolutely and he did other you know he did
paint he would come back i remember the following year he would he would do a painting of the
carnival wouldn't he yes from the sketches he would come back so it was like a full-blown
yeah sort of color type of thing of what happened the year before and he'd even capture an individual
face yeah yeah there you are jason yeah well that's yeah that's you over there in your t-shirt or your
your yellow reflective hyphids hyphids yeah but there we are yeah a great man yeah
and a great man of you know the history of cardiff in general you know oh yes and i've
been a policeman down the docks when it was tiger bay and could tell you stories of all sorts
yeah in fact to be honest with you he was also in the british army and fought against the
mao mao in kenya so uh there's stories there that uh will come out at a later date
so that was 95 we've been 95 yeah the dog sort of gets a bit confused in my memory as to you
know because we were at katay's quite a while then and uh yeah so the memories blend in to each other
being in being in there but uh yeah but but by this time i i i yeah i think of you as being
very much of a part of the swicker family and uh yeah and carl of carnival was the mainstay but
of course swicker has always done other projects throughout the year and you got involved in the
finale event uh for the sunday evening for the i think it was the first or second beyond the
border storytelling festival at saint donald's atlantic college in the vale of the morgan
what can you remember about that what was that experience that was fantastic as well it was um
i'd never been to saint donald's before i'd heard about the storytelling festival but i didn't think
it was be my cup of tea you know um but saint donald's atlantic college a fantastic venue
you know beautiful old you know castle by the sea in a little valley with a lovely big green
fields around here lovely you know sea views and cliffs there and uh you know i was lucky enough
to be there for two weeks with access to the swimming pool and lovely hot sunny weather
um i was working with with adrian then to do music the music element of it elephant
yeah music element of it but i was also helping with some of the costume building
and we had uh as we were there's a main sort of campsite at the top
where we had uh some big tents up there we've had costumes in there and costume building in there and
on-site caterers as well uh mad on-site caterers and um yeah as i say we would just be down
wandering around the castle and stuff and then working on music building costumes and working
on how we were going to do this performance as well because it was all quite spontaneous and in
uh organic the way it came together i think it was based on the one of the ancient irish epics of lu
luke of the shining arm yeah shining arm and his magic spear and all the rest yes you're
not saying the eye of balor yeah yeah gothy was there setting fire to things as usual yeah there's
gothy there was um you know fire labyrinths um and a strange story with strange sounds being projected
through and stilt walkers and um yeah and dancers all around the place because the actual performance
was at one end of the what was the jousting field um but the performance was going on around to the
sides as well and converging on the main main thing there yes um because the storytelling
festival was generally quite quiet sort of festival because there's different storytelling things
going on and obviously everything else had to end before the performance happened so there was
explosion of everybody who was there it just came yeah so there was a you know big audience
lovely weather throughout and the evening was lovely warm weather and it's interesting that
that one-off performance led us to swicker to develop a purely professional piece not a community
piece of work called invasion of the soul which um again looked at that interpreted the same story
though in a different format um and actually toured it only got three performances it played
carniv bay it played narbeth and it played uh carnav and castle in north wales so it's amazing
how these things yeah emerged and it's great to remember yeah where they came from yeah yeah
absolutely um you know and working on the music as well we were trying out different instruments
and whether we're going to go more percussion or whatever and we built sort of mad trumpets
out of bits about you know yeah sort of scrap scrap instruments stuff just colorful mad scrap
things and uh yeah so we ended up doing a fair bit of drumming there was a few musicians there
not not too many it was just enough yeah um and i remember practicing up in the big field and it
was around the same time that saint athens air show was on and we had the red red arrows doing
air displays over the top of us when we were practicing the drumming you know i was practicing
my eyes open looking at these red arrows flying over in formation oh wow that's a
trail of smoke coming through wow wow that was a good one i always say carnival i'm particularly
in carnival camps um yeah all human life is there yeah um would it be true to say that during the
course of a carnival camp you met somebody who was to be significant in later yes yes well uh yeah i
met my who was to become my wife vicki um she was actually there at the second year i was i was there
at uh me and park primary school i remember meeting her there through another mutual friend
janette hodgson um and i remember meeting her but she was working on a different section um i'm
trying to think whose section she was working on i can't remember now um but i remember you know
distinctly remember meeting her there but um we didn't actually get together for a few years
after that and we sort of uh through janette i used to sort of go and crash at janette's place
sometimes during the carnival and uh and we sort of met then and we got together and after about a
year of uh courting uh hey it's wonderful it's great we got together and uh yeah she eventually
moved up to west wales to live with me and we got we did get married in the end after living
together for a bit and uh yeah we've been together about 20 years now i do like a happy ending yes
yeah yeah and we're still living up in the hills there now so yeah so she's got her own memories
of the carnival as well and uh i think perhaps we might have to speak to her equally you know at some
point it has to be done yeah yeah absolutely and um yeah she's she's sure she's got some copies of
some jack's pictures as well so i would be lovely so she's going to try and hunt them down that's
fantastic yeah yeah
jason uh it's been great talking to you i wish to award you verbally at this stage
the uh honorary position of uh carnival hero jason laudé thank you very much indeed my pleasure
thanks for asking you